hello my son welcome to the fifth
question from Tom Rosburg
and I love mathematics which you guys
have scented and voted for so thank you
other ways study those questions in our
provoking the winning questions this
week two really nice one what are the
most basic mathematical axioms for those
of you that don't know an axiom is sort
of a rule that you're allowed to assume
is true so in maths we have this thing
that we have to prove results it's sort
of the thing about being a mathematician
and what makes mathematicians are
different to say physicists or engineer
we like to prove things that we know
they're true beyond all doubt there's no
way they cannot be true once you prove
it that's it it's set in stone in order
to get to these proofs you have to start
somewhere so if you're going to prove
something you have to have a set of
statements which we call axioms which
everyone everywhere agrees are true so
there's a very very simple statement and
once you just say like these are true
this is the starting point of math you
can then use these axioms to build upon
and you basically get all the maps that
we know today so this may sound a little
crazy you go from very simple statements
to say proving Fermat's Last Theorem but
the trick is you're sort of doing it
step by step so as you'll see it's often
very very simple rules about addition
and multiplication and from there just
by going step by step by step gradually
building on in little pieces it's almost
like building a skyscraper you have your
foundation right at the base which you
can think of as our axioms and then
you're just building little by little by
little and eventually you've got the
Empire State Building or in our case
you've got all of maths you're right at
the forefront of mathematical research
today
so what are the he's axiom well for the
real numbers there are ten tens very
basic axioms upon which pretty much all
of Max's bill animates a pretty much is
you need a few more properties about
ordering of numbers
and about completeness of the numbers
which I'm not going to go into but these
10 axioms plus ordering plus
completeness that's it
they are the most basic mathematical
axioms upon which all of that is built
so I've written all said axioms on the
board and if we start with the verses
before a 1 a 4 for addition so the first
one we have a plus B equals B plus a so
this is telling you can add numbers in
any order 2 plus 3 is equal to 3 plus 2
they're both 5 it may seem kind of
obvious but that because we've been
taught this in school but you need to
define these things for max to make
sense and that is the point of axioms
and this first law is called the
associative law a 2 is called the
distributive law and this tells you that
if you have a plus something in brackets
people see it's the same as a plus B
third and then C so I'm saying again you
can add the second and third numbers
together and then add them to the first
or you can add the first two numbers and
then add the third you'll get the same
answer a three really important one
because this to find the identity the
identity is a concept in math which
means a number such that the original
number is changed under that operation
so for additive if you add 0 to a number
you get the same number so that makes 0
the identity for addition and this is
what a 3 is saying and then a 4 is
defining inverses so the definition of
an inverse methodically is you have a
number you add its inverse you should
get the identity so here you have a you
add minus a and you get back to 0 which
is the identity by the circle and now
moving on to the multiplication
again everyone through to m4 they follow
the same pattern so like we had the
associative law for addition at a1 we
have the same law for multiplication is
m1 so saying that 2 times 3 is the same
as 3 times 2 they're both 6 and 2 is
your distributive law for multiplication
so again same an addition you can add
numbers in any order this is saying you
can multiply numbers in any order for M
3 again similar have got identity so
like 0 was the identity for addition for
multiplication you need a number such
that when you multiply the starting one
by this identity you get back your
starting number so that has to be one
for multiplication then M 4 is going to
define your multiplication infants so 4
8 4 and addition you add the negative of
your number you get 0 the identity for
multiplication you have to take your
original number a multiply it by its
reciprocal so 1 divided by that number
so 2 times 1/2 1/2 equals 1 also a very
important part of this definition which
is that a must be non zero because
course you can never divide by 0 in math
the model says you cannot divide by 0
you can take the limit as you divide by
0 you cannot actually divide by 0 and
then we have our final two axioms just
sort of stand-alone we have d the
distributive law this is just telling
you what happens when multiplication and
addition occur at the same time so tell
you which one comes first and how to to
deal with that situation and it's
basically just telling us how to
multiply a bracket and the last axiom
axioms n is by far my favorite because
it seems so silly to say 0 is not equal
to 1 but without this all of the other
axioms don't really make sense and sort
of all of that collapses it's like the
apartment if you get rid of this act
so imperative we have zero does not
equal one as a defined unquestionable
rule or axiom of mass using these ten
rules which are unquestionably true they
do not need to be proven as long as you
go small steps you can basically prove
any results in all of maths history so
again it seems crazy but it is as long
as you go step by step everything is
built up from these very very simple
building blocks and so what I'm going to
do now as a little demonstration is to
using only these ten basic axioms I'm
going to write up a few results and show
you how to use these to prove slightly
more complicated results and then you
could take those improve slightly more
complicated results and you're just
building upon previous knowledge and
previous Proops and ever and eventually
you sort of get to the big theorems in
math everything can be traced back to
assuming that these axioms are true so
the first result I'm going to prove is
this one if a plus X is April slide
there x equals y so this is known as the
cancellation laws for addition and by
proving this you also as a result get
the uniqueness of the additive inverse
minus X so let's start by saying well
what is y why is y equals y plus 0 which
we've got from age three now we need to
try and introduce our additive inverse
so let's use a 4 because we have 0 here
and a 4 tells us what 0 is equal now
we're going to use number two so a 2 to
change the order of our terms now if we
use a 1 which tells us we can switch
around terms and now by our original
statement a plus X equals 8 plus y we
are allowed to use that and now we're
just going to do the same step but in
Reverse and now we have our result so
we've gone through a total of nine steps
starting with Y using
axiom 3:40 while then we use our
hypothesis or the statement that we were
allowed to assume beginning and then
another four axioms and we get to X so
now I'm going to do one more example of
a property that we can prove using our
axioms and also it's going to require us
to use our vs. up here the cancellation
property of addition so this is showing
you how we started with the axioms we've
used them to get this result but I'm
using digital plus still the axioms I'm
going to show you how to prove that a
times zero is zero so to start with what
we're going to do is consider a times
zero plus zero and I'm using actually
made three we know that a number plus
zero is just that number and now what
we're going to do is use a three again
because a number plus zero is that
number so what if maybe it's just deal
so zero is equal to zero plus zero now
we're going to use for the first time
our distribution lordy and now we're
going to use the result that we just
proved in number one because April x
equals x plus y that's what we have here
so in yellow what we've got it's just
rule one and rule one tells us for x
equals y so therefore I rule one we know
that X which is zero people a dot zero
and we're done that's what we wanted to
prove at the very beginning so this hope
you gives you an idea of we started with
these axioms we use these axioms to
prove a results number one and then
using that results with that proof
something a bit more complicated in
number two using that result plus active
so you can see how everything's building
on top of everything and you can just
continue like this and eventually get to
all of that there are of course many
other results which can improve in the
same way relying on earlier results I'm
relying on the axiom I know time to do
them all so I've done is a writ now
ten and what you guys the whole hub goes
see if you can do it and then send me
your solutions so here is your list
so there's your list ten other
properties which can be proved using
purely the axioms some of the later ones
in the list will rely on using the
earlier results so I suggest you start
with number three and work your way
through to number 12 so there you have
it depends most basic mathematical
axioms
hopefully I've explained them all I show
you how to use this you guys have a go
at using them see how you get on
so thank you everybody for watching if
you like what I'm doing please do
subscribe also check out my Facebook
page Instagram Twitter app Tom rocks
maps check out my website from
rocksfast.com everything's on there
I remember please do keep sending me
your questions keep voting and I will
see you next time for question number
six